README.md, before:

[![GitHub Workflow Status](https://img.shields.io/github/workflow/status/koesterlab/datavzrd/CI)](https://github.com/koesterlab/datavzrd/actions)
[![Conda Recipe](https://img.shields.io/badge/recipe-datavzrd-green.svg)](https://anaconda.org/conda-forge/datavzrd)
[![Conda Downloads](https://img.shields.io/conda/dn/conda-forge/datavzrd.svg)](https://anaconda.org/conda-forge/datavzrd)
[![Conda Version](https://img.shields.io/conda/vn/conda-forge/datavzrd.svg)](https://anaconda.org/conda-forge/datavzrd)

# datavzrd
A tool to create visual and interactive HTML reports from collections of CSV/TSV tables. Reports include automatically generated vega-lite histograms per column. 
Plots can be fully customized by users via a config file. These also allow the user to add linkouts to other websites or link between multiple tables. 
An example report can be [viewed online](https://koesterlab.github.io/datavzrd/index.html) with the [corresponding config file](https://github.com/koesterlab/datavzrd/tree/main/.examples/example-config.yaml).

## Usage

```datavzrd config.yaml --output results/```

## Configuring datavzrd

datavzrd allows the user to easily customize it's interactive HTML report via a config file.
When generating large reports, templating yaml files can be a bit tricky. We advise using [yte](https://github.com/koesterlab/yte) for easy yaml templating with python expressions.

```yaml
name: My beautiful datvzrd report
datasets:
  table-a:
    path: "table-a.csv"
    links:
      gene details:
        column: gene
        view: "gene-{value}"
      gene expression:
        column: gene
        table-row: table-b/gene
        optional: true
  table-b:
    path: table-b.csv
    separator: ;
  gene-mycn:
    path: "genes/table-mycn.csv"
    header-rows: 2
    links:
      some expression:
        column: quality
        view: table-b
views:
  table-a:
    dataset: table-a
    desc: |
      # A header
      This is the **description** for *table-a*.
    render-table:
      x:
        custom: |
          function(value) {
            return `<b>${value}</b>`;
          }
      y:
        link-to-url: 'https://www.ensembl.org/Homo_sapiens/Gene/Summary?db=core;g={value}'
  table-b:
    dataset: table-b
    render-table:
      significance:
        optional: true
        custom-plot:
          data: |
            function(value) {
              return [{"significance": value, "threshold": value > 60}]
            }
          spec: |
            {
              "$schema": "https://vega.github.io/schema/vega-lite/v5.json",
              "mark": "circle",
              "encoding": {
                "size": {"field": "significance", "type": "quantitative", "scale": {"domain": [0,100]}},
                "color": {"field": "threshold", "scale": {"domain": [true,false]}}
              },
              "config": {"legend": {"disable": true}}
            }
  gene-mycn:
    dataset: gene-mycn
    page-size: 40
    render-table:
      frequency:
        plot:
          ticks:
            scale: linear
      quality:
        plot:
          heatmap:
            scale: linear
            range:
              - green
              - red
  gene-mycn-plot:
    dataset: gene-mycn
    render-plot:
      spec: |
        {
              "$schema": "https://vega.github.io/schema/vega-lite/v5.json",
              "mark": "circle",
              "encoding": {
                "size": {"field": "significance", "type": "quantitative", "scale": {"domain": [0,100]}},
                "color": {"field": "threshold", "scale": {"domain": [true,false]}},
                "href": {"field": "some expression"}
              },
              "config": {"legend": {"disable": true}}
            }
```

### name

`name` allows the user to optionally set a name for the generated report that will be heading all resulting tables and plots.

### default-view

`default-view` allows the user to optionally specify a view for the generated report that will be shown when opening the index file.

### datasets

`datasets` defines the different datasets of the report. This is also the place to define links between your individual datasets.

### max-in-memory-rows

`max-in-memory-rows` defines the threshold for the maximum number of rows in memory. If the given dataset exceeds the threshold the data will be split across multiple pages and their html files. Defaults to 1000 rows.

| keyword         | explanation                         | default |
| --------------- | ----------------------------------- | ------- |
| path            | The path of the CSV/TSV file        |         |
| separator       | The delimiter of the file           | ,       |
| header-rows     | Number of header-rows of the file   | 1       |
| [links](#links) | Configuration linking between items |         |

### views

`views` consists of all different CSV/TSV views (table or plot) that should be included in the resulting report. If neither `render-table` nor `render-plot` is present, datavzrd will render the given file as a table. Each item definition can contain these values:

| keyword                       | explanation                                                                                                                                | default |
| ----------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ | ------- |
| desc                          | A description that will be shown in the report. [Markdown](https://github.github.com/gfm/) is allowed and will be rendered to proper HTML. |         |
| dataset                       | The name of the corresponding dataset to this view defined in [datasets](#datasets)                                                        |         |
| page-size                     | Number of rows per page                                                                                                                    | 100     |
| [render-table](#render-table) | Configuration of individual column rendering                                                                                               |         |
| [render-plot](#render-plot)   | Configuration of a single plot                                                                                                             |         |
| hidden                        | Whether or not the view is shown in the menu navigation                                                                                    | false   |
| max-in-memory-rows            | Overwrites the global settings for [max-in-memory-rows](#max-in-memory-rows)                                                               |         |

### render-table 

`render-table` contains individual configurations for each column that can either be adressed by its name defined in the header of the CSV/TSV file, its 0-based index (e.g. `index(5)` for the 6th column), or a regular expression (e.g. `regex('prob:.+')` for matching all columns starting with `prob:`):

| keyword                     | explanation                                                                                                                                                                                   | default | possible values |
| --------------------------- | --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | ------- | --------------- |
| link-to-url                 | Renders a link to the given url with {value} replace by the value of the table. Other values of the same row can be accessed by their column header (e.g. {age} for a column named age).      |         |                 |
| custom                      | Applies the given js function to render column content. The parameters of the function are similar to the ones defined [here](https://bootstrap-table.com/docs/api/column-options/#formatter) |         |                 |
| [custom-plot](#custom-plot) | Renders a custom vega-lite plot to the corresponding table cell                                                                                                                               |         |                 |
| [plot](#plot)               | Renders a vega-lite plot defined with [plot](#plot) to the corresponding table cell                                                                                                           |         |                 |
| ellipsis                    | Shortens values to the first *n* given characters with the rest hidden behind a popover                                                                                                       |         |                 |
| optional                    | Allows to have a column specified in render-table that is actually not present.                                                                                                               | false   | true, false     |
| display-mode                | Allows to have a column only in [detail view](https://examples.bootstrap-table.com/#options/detail-view.html#view-source) by setting this to `detail`.                                        | normal  | detail, normal  |

### render-plot

`render-plot` contains individual configurations for generating a single plot from the given CSV/TSV file.

| keyword   | explanation                                                                                        |
| --------- | -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| spec      | A schema for a vega lite plot that will be rendered to a single view                               |
| spec-path | The path to a file containing a schema for a vega lite plot that will be rendered to a single view |

### links

`links` can configure linkouts between multiple items.

| keyword   | explanation                                                                                                      | default |
| --------- | ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | ------- |
| column    | The column that contains the value used for the linkout                                                          |         |
| table-row | Renders as a linkout to the other table highlighting the row in which the gene column has the same value as here |         |
| view      | Renders as a link to the given view                                                                              |         |
| optional  | Allows missing values in linked tables                                                                           | false   |

### custom-plot

`custom-plot` allows the rendering of customized vega-lite plots per cell.

| keyword       | explanation                                                                                                | default |
| ------------- | ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | ------- |
| data          | A function to return the data needed for the schema (see below) from the content of the column cell        |         |
| spec          | The vega-lite spec for a vega plot that is rendered into each cell of this column                          |         |
| spec-path     | The path to a file containing a schema for a vega-lite plot that is rendered into each cell of this column |         |
| vega-controls | Whether or not the resulting vega-lite plot is supposed to have action-links in the embedded view          | false   |

### plot

`plot` allows the rendering of either a [tick-plot](https://vega.github.io/vega-lite/docs/tick.html) for numeric values or a heatmap for nominal values.

| keyword             | explanation                                                                               |
| ------------------- | ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| [ticks](#ticks)     | Defines a [tick-plot](https://vega.github.io/vega-lite/docs/tick.html) for numeric values |
| [heatmap](#heatmap) | Defines a heatmap for numeric or nominal values                                           |

### ticks

`ticks` defines the attributes of a [tick-plot](https://vega.github.io/vega-lite/docs/tick.html) for numeric values.

| keyword | explanation                                                                                                                       |
| ------- | --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| scale   | Defines the [scale](https://vega.github.io/vega-lite/docs/scale.html) of the tick plot                                            |
| domain  | Defines the domain of the tick plot. If not present datavzrd will automatically use the minimum and maximum values for the domain |

### heatmap

`heatmap` defines the attributes of a heatmap for numeric or nominal values.

| keyword      | explanation                                                                                                         |
| ------------ | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| scale        | Defines the [scale](https://vega.github.io/vega-lite/docs/scale.html) of the heatmap                                |
| color-scheme | Defines the [color-scheme](https://vega.github.io/vega/docs/schemes/#categorical) of the heatmap for nominal values |
| range        | Defines the color range of the heatmap as a list                                                                    |
| domain       | Defines the domain of the heatmap as a list                                                                         |

## Authors

* [Johannes Köster](https://github.com/johanneskoester) (https://koesterlab.github.io)
* [Felix Wiegand](https://github.com/fxwiegand)

Commit message:

feat: New keyword aux-domain-columns

README.md, after:

[![GitHub Workflow Status](https://img.shields.io/github/workflow/status/koesterlab/datavzrd/CI)](https://github.com/koesterlab/datavzrd/actions)
[![Conda Recipe](https://img.shields.io/badge/recipe-datavzrd-green.svg)](https://anaconda.org/conda-forge/datavzrd)
[![Conda Downloads](https://img.shields.io/conda/dn/conda-forge/datavzrd.svg)](https://anaconda.org/conda-forge/datavzrd)
[![Conda Version](https://img.shields.io/conda/vn/conda-forge/datavzrd.svg)](https://anaconda.org/conda-forge/datavzrd)

# datavzrd
A tool to create visual and interactive HTML reports from collections of CSV/TSV tables. Reports include automatically generated vega-lite histograms per column. 
Plots can be fully customized by users via a config file. These also allow the user to add linkouts to other websites or link between multiple tables. 
An example report can be [viewed online](https://koesterlab.github.io/datavzrd/index.html) with the [corresponding config file](https://github.com/koesterlab/datavzrd/tree/main/.examples/example-config.yaml).

## Usage

```datavzrd config.yaml --output results/```

## Configuring datavzrd

datavzrd allows the user to easily customize it's interactive HTML report via a config file.
When generating large reports, templating yaml files can be a bit tricky. We advise using [yte](https://github.com/koesterlab/yte) for easy yaml templating with python expressions.

```yaml
name: My beautiful datvzrd report
datasets:
  table-a:
    path: "table-a.csv"
    links:
      gene details:
        column: gene
        view: "gene-{value}"
      gene expression:
        column: gene
        table-row: table-b/gene
        optional: true
  table-b:
    path: table-b.csv
    separator: ;
  gene-mycn:
    path: "genes/table-mycn.csv"
    header-rows: 2
    links:
      some expression:
        column: quality
        view: table-b
views:
  table-a:
    dataset: table-a
    desc: |
      # A header
      This is the **description** for *table-a*.
    render-table:
      x:
        custom: |
          function(value) {
            return `<b>${value}</b>`;
          }
      y:
        link-to-url: 'https://www.ensembl.org/Homo_sapiens/Gene/Summary?db=core;g={value}'
  table-b:
    dataset: table-b
    render-table:
      significance:
        optional: true
        custom-plot:
          data: |
            function(value) {
              return [{"significance": value, "threshold": value > 60}]
            }
          spec: |
            {
              "$schema": "https://vega.github.io/schema/vega-lite/v5.json",
              "mark": "circle",
              "encoding": {
                "size": {"field": "significance", "type": "quantitative", "scale": {"domain": [0,100]}},
                "color": {"field": "threshold", "scale": {"domain": [true,false]}}
              },
              "config": {"legend": {"disable": true}}
            }
  gene-mycn:
    dataset: gene-mycn
    page-size: 40
    render-table:
      frequency:
        plot:
          ticks:
            scale: linear
      quality:
        plot:
          heatmap:
            scale: linear
            range:
              - green
              - red
  gene-mycn-plot:
    dataset: gene-mycn
    render-plot:
      spec: |
        {
              "$schema": "https://vega.github.io/schema/vega-lite/v5.json",
              "mark": "circle",
              "encoding": {
                "size": {"field": "significance", "type": "quantitative", "scale": {"domain": [0,100]}},
                "color": {"field": "threshold", "scale": {"domain": [true,false]}},
                "href": {"field": "some expression"}
              },
              "config": {"legend": {"disable": true}}
            }
```

### name

`name` allows the user to optionally set a name for the generated report that will be heading all resulting tables and plots.

### default-view

`default-view` allows the user to optionally specify a view for the generated report that will be shown when opening the index file.

### datasets

`datasets` defines the different datasets of the report. This is also the place to define links between your individual datasets.

### max-in-memory-rows

`max-in-memory-rows` defines the threshold for the maximum number of rows in memory. If the given dataset exceeds the threshold the data will be split across multiple pages and their html files. Defaults to 1000 rows.

| keyword         | explanation                         | default |
| --------------- | ----------------------------------- | ------- |
| path            | The path of the CSV/TSV file        |         |
| separator       | The delimiter of the file           | ,       |
| header-rows     | Number of header-rows of the file   | 1       |
| [links](#links) | Configuration linking between items |         |

### views

`views` consists of all different CSV/TSV views (table or plot) that should be included in the resulting report. If neither `render-table` nor `render-plot` is present, datavzrd will render the given file as a table. Each item definition can contain these values:

| keyword                       | explanation                                                                                                                                | default |
| ----------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ | ------- |
| desc                          | A description that will be shown in the report. [Markdown](https://github.github.com/gfm/) is allowed and will be rendered to proper HTML. |         |
| dataset                       | The name of the corresponding dataset to this view defined in [datasets](#datasets)                                                        |         |
| page-size                     | Number of rows per page                                                                                                                    | 100     |
| [render-table](#render-table) | Configuration of individual column rendering                                                                                               |         |
| [render-plot](#render-plot)   | Configuration of a single plot                                                                                                             |         |
| hidden                        | Whether or not the view is shown in the menu navigation                                                                                    | false   |
| max-in-memory-rows            | Overwrites the global settings for [max-in-memory-rows](#max-in-memory-rows)                                                               |         |

### render-table 

`render-table` contains individual configurations for each column that can either be adressed by its name defined in the header of the CSV/TSV file, its 0-based index (e.g. `index(5)` for the 6th column), or a regular expression (e.g. `regex('prob:.+')` for matching all columns starting with `prob:`):

| keyword                     | explanation                                                                                                                                                                                   | default | possible values |
| --------------------------- | --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | ------- | --------------- |
| link-to-url                 | Renders a link to the given url with {value} replace by the value of the table. Other values of the same row can be accessed by their column header (e.g. {age} for a column named age).      |         |                 |
| custom                      | Applies the given js function to render column content. The parameters of the function are similar to the ones defined [here](https://bootstrap-table.com/docs/api/column-options/#formatter) |         |                 |
| [custom-plot](#custom-plot) | Renders a custom vega-lite plot to the corresponding table cell                                                                                                                               |         |                 |
| [plot](#plot)               | Renders a vega-lite plot defined with [plot](#plot) to the corresponding table cell                                                                                                           |         |                 |
| ellipsis                    | Shortens values to the first *n* given characters with the rest hidden behind a popover                                                                                                       |         |                 |
| optional                    | Allows to have a column specified in render-table that is actually not present.                                                                                                               | false   | true, false     |
| display-mode                | Allows to have a column only in [detail view](https://examples.bootstrap-table.com/#options/detail-view.html#view-source) by setting this to `detail`.                                        | normal  | detail, normal  |

### render-plot

`render-plot` contains individual configurations for generating a single plot from the given CSV/TSV file.

| keyword   | explanation                                                                                        |
| --------- | -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| spec      | A schema for a vega lite plot that will be rendered to a single view                               |
| spec-path | The path to a file containing a schema for a vega lite plot that will be rendered to a single view |

### links

`links` can configure linkouts between multiple items.

| keyword   | explanation                                                                                                      | default |
| --------- | ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | ------- |
| column    | The column that contains the value used for the linkout                                                          |         |
| table-row | Renders as a linkout to the other table highlighting the row in which the gene column has the same value as here |         |
| view      | Renders as a link to the given view                                                                              |         |
| optional  | Allows missing values in linked tables                                                                           | false   |

### custom-plot

`custom-plot` allows the rendering of customized vega-lite plots per cell.

| keyword       | explanation                                                                                                | default |
| ------------- | ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | ------- |
| data          | A function to return the data needed for the schema (see below) from the content of the column cell        |         |
| spec          | The vega-lite spec for a vega plot that is rendered into each cell of this column                          |         |
| spec-path     | The path to a file containing a schema for a vega-lite plot that is rendered into each cell of this column |         |
| vega-controls | Whether or not the resulting vega-lite plot is supposed to have action-links in the embedded view          | false   |

### plot

`plot` allows the rendering of either a [tick-plot](https://vega.github.io/vega-lite/docs/tick.html) for numeric values or a heatmap for nominal values.

| keyword             | explanation                                                                               |
| ------------------- | ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| [ticks](#ticks)     | Defines a [tick-plot](https://vega.github.io/vega-lite/docs/tick.html) for numeric values |
| [heatmap](#heatmap) | Defines a heatmap for numeric or nominal values                                           |

### ticks

`ticks` defines the attributes of a [tick-plot](https://vega.github.io/vega-lite/docs/tick.html) for numeric values.

| keyword            | explanation                                                                                                                       |
|--------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| scale              | Defines the [scale](https://vega.github.io/vega-lite/docs/scale.html) of the tick plot                                            |
| domain             | Defines the domain of the tick plot. If not present datavzrd will automatically use the minimum and maximum values for the domain |
| aux-domain-columns | Allows to specify a list of other columns that will be additionally used to determine the domain of the tick plot.                |

### heatmap

`heatmap` defines the attributes of a heatmap for numeric or nominal values.

| keyword            | explanation                                                                                                                                        |
|--------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| scale              | Defines the [scale](https://vega.github.io/vega-lite/docs/scale.html) of the heatmap                                                               |
| color-scheme       | Defines the [color-scheme](https://vega.github.io/vega/docs/schemes/#categorical) of the heatmap for nominal values                                |
| range              | Defines the color range of the heatmap as a list                                                                                                   |
| domain             | Defines the domain of the heatmap as a list                                                                                                        |
| aux-domain-columns | Allows to specify a list of other columns that will be additionally used to determine the domain of the heatmap. Only allowed for numeric columns. |

## Authors

* [Johannes Köster](https://github.com/johanneskoester) (https://koesterlab.github.io)
* [Felix Wiegand](https://github.com/fxwiegand)
